Progressive Evolution of Emotion Detection: From
Unimodal Baselines to a Quad-Modal Dynamic
Fusion Architecture
Atharv Shukla
Axis Institute of Technology and Management
Kanpur, IND
Rashi Agrawal
Computer Science and Engineering
Harcourt Butler Technical University
Kanpur, IND
Abstract—Background:Older Emotion Detection Systems rely
on a single type of input like Audio or Video. While those are
effective in a controlled lab or studio, those single Input systems
often fail in real world scenarios like dim lights, noise in audio,
improper speech and many real world problematic conditions.
Objective:In this paper, we present a new Quad-Modal Emo-
tion Detection System that is a Fusion of four major sub-models,
which are: static facial pictures, moving facial expressions, speech
tone, and spoken words and texts (NLP).
Methods:In this Model we built a Dynamic Weighted Algo-
rithm that shifts the focus of the model to that one of the Sub-
model based on the condition of recognition of Emotion like ”Is
there only video or No person is visible in camera so only speech
or text”.It is done by using Cross Model Multi head attention.
Results:Even though we ran this system on CPU purely due
to the absence of a CUDA Compatible NVIDIA GPU — utilizing
the asynchronous state of buffering for the heavy NLP pipeline
to maintain the video frame rates — Our training and test shows
the accuracy of 61.21% with the mean AUC of 0.90 across six
emotion classes on chaotic real-world datasets.
Conclusion:By sacrificing the peak studio accuracy in the ex-
change of massive environment resilience, this architecture serves
as a Robust System for Human-Computer Interaction(HCI)
Index Terms—Emotion Detection, Quad-Modal AI, Deep-
Learning, Cross-Modal Attention, Natural Language Processing
(NLP), Feature Fusion, CPU Optimization, AI Ethics
I. INTRODUCTION
Teaching an AI System to understand the human emotion
is a huge part of modern technology era. As we know, AI
integrates into hospitals, offices, businesses and to many works
so its necessary for AI to understand that how human feels.So
for this purpose, there are many Traditional AI System build
that are baseline models. They only work on Audio(speech
recording) or Video Recognition. But these systems are not
enough to recognize and understand the Emotions of a human
being. Also they do not work well in Real world Conditions.
These unimodal(baseline single-Input model) works well in
labs and studios but they consistently fail in real-world chaotic
conditions where dynamic lighting and occulsion destroy static
feature extraction [17]. They might analyze a picture of a face
or recognize through face or speech, but they rarely do well.
To fix this limitation, we built a Quad-modal(Multi-modal)
system that has Dynamic Fusion Architecture. Instead of
processing just one resource only, enable it to process four
different streams:
• Dynamic Video: We track moving facial muscles using
2D CNNs on stacked optical flow frames.
• Audio Tone: We analyze voice pitch and rhythm using
1D CNNs on Mel-Spectrograms.
• Textual Sentiment: We understand the actual words be-
ing said using Whisper and DistilRoBERTa NLP models.
• Static Vision: We use a pre-trained Facial Expression
Recognition (FER) model as a fallback.
Our main manager of this system is Dynamic Weighted
Algorithm, that continuously focus on which stream gives best
result of recognizing Emotion in the Four Sub-models.
A. Comprehensive Literature Review
Researchers
has
been
trying
to
solve
the
Emotion-
Recognition for a long time, from massive math to deep-
learning models.
1) The Era of Handcrafted Features (2000-2012): Before
deep learning, Researchers mostly used basic machine learning
to solve emotion recognition like Support Vector Machine
(SVM) and logical patterns that can work well but in a
condition of perfect lightning and the person should look
straight on camera, but if a slightly turned face or move
towards shadow, the system rules fell apart.
2) The Deep Learning Visual Revolution (2012-2018):
When deep learning emerged, the 2D Convolution Neural Net-
work (CNN) break the rules and accuracy records of datasets
like FER2013. The CNN model recognizes face shapes by its
own and starts recognizing the emotions. But there is limitation
occurs that at this time the model only recognize the static
image and struggled to capture subtle temporal movements,
such as a smile, it fails on this.
3) The Shift to Bimodal Audio-Visual Systems (2018-2022):
To fix this problem, Researchers developed a ”Bimodal”
system that has a fusion of both audio and video, where both
of these work and attempted to concatenate audio and visual
data into a unified feature vector prior to classification(this is
called Early Fusion). The big problem here was background
noise. If the user stopped talking, then system pick up static,
which would ruin the merged data and cause the system to
guess the wrong emotion.
4) The Current Paradigm: Transformer and NLP Integra-
tion: Today’s systems, they process data separately and only
merge the final guesses (Late Fusion).Even now the systems
like Chatgpt work perfectly and start understanding the human
word even some systems can now recognize macro and micro
Emotion of face.Our system build on this by merging fours
streams into one Fusion Engine.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Proposed Architecture
Fig. 1. The Quad-Modal Dynamic Weighting Fusion Architecture.
1) Unimodal Feature Extraction: Before system can merge
anything, it has to gather the raw data from Environment, for
this purpose we have architected four pipelines that are running
separately side by side:
a) Dynamic Facial Motion (Video CNN): Standard mod-
els just looks at flat image. To actually see movement in face
over time, our system pulls a sequence of 15 frames from the
webcam and stacks their grayscale and optical flow channels
into 30-channel tensor of shape 64×64×30. A 2D CNN then
scans this stacked representation to capture both spatial and
temporal facial patterns.
b) Vocal Tone Analysis (Audio CNN): To quantify acous-
tic intensity that someone is yelling or whispering, we take the
raw audio and convert it into combined Mel-Spectrogram and
MFCC feature matrix of shape 150 × 136 × 1. A series of
2D and 1D CNN layers then scans matrix and finds emotional
acoustic patterns.
c) Textual Sentiment (Whisper & DistilRoBERTa): Sar-
casm cannot be detected through a picture. To solve this, we
run the audio through OpenAI’s Whisper model to turn the
speech into text, then that text passed to DistilRoBERTa, a
transformer model fine-tuned on emotion classification that
reads the text and figures out the underlying mood.
d) Static Vision Fallback (FER): In some scenarios peo-
ple remains motionless and silent. When the motion and
emotion models fail, we rely on pre-trained HuggingFace
Facial Expression Recognition pipeline to analyze a single
cropped face frame and keep the system running.
2) Mathematical Formulation of the Neural Networks: To
properly process the spatio-temporal data, the Video CNN
relies on a stacked frame convolution operation. If we let
V (x, y, t) represent the video input where x, y are spatial co-
ordinates and t is the stacked frame channel, the mathematical
feature map F is generated by:
F(x, y, t) =
X
i
X
j
X
k
W(i, j, k) · V (x −i, y −j, t −k) + b
(1)
where W is the learned weight kernel and b is the bias.
For the acoustic pipeline, the 1D CNN scans the Mel-
Spectrogram S(f, t). The 1D convolution isolates the temporal
acoustic shifts without overlapping into the visual data:
A(t) =
X
k
K(k) · S(t −k) + ba
(2)
By keeping these operations mathematically distinct, we guar-
antee that background noise in the audio stream cannot poison
the visual feature maps before fusion.
B. Detailed System Architecture and Data Flow
Running the four AI models at the same time is a challenge,
since we were only able to use CPU only due to system
limitations. To make this work without lagging we split the
workload into multiple threads.
1) Video Preprocessing Pipeline: The Video thread grabs
webcam frames at about 30 frames per second. Firstly, we turn
the frame black and white to save processing power. then, a
Haar Cascade scans the frame to find the face. Once we find
the face we crop everything else in the background. Finally,
we resize the face to exactly 64 × 64 pixels and stack 15
consecutive frames into a 30 channel tensor. Doing this strict
cleanup ensures our models don’t get confused by cluttered
backgrounds.
2) Audio Preprocessing Pipeline: At the same time, the
audio thread listens in 3-second chunks at 22050 Hz. We pass
the audio through a Voice Activity Detector(VAD). If the VAD
hears nothing but silence, it throws the audio away so we do
not waste CPU power. If it hears someone is talking, then
it converts the sound into a combined Mel-Spectrogram and
MFCC matrix using Librosa library. This matrix is then sent
directly to the audio neural network.
C. The Dynamic Weighting Algorithm
Instead of blindly smashing all our data together, we use a
two-stage fusion strategy. First, the Audio and Video branches
are merged inside the trained keras model using four-head
Cross-Modal Multi-Head Attention layer. Second, at the same
time, the API engine fuses the model’s output with the static
FER and Text NLP predictions using adaptive confidence
based weights.
Let Pav represent the Audio-Video attention output, Pf the
static FER prediction, and Pt the text NLP prediction. Our
final prediction is:
Efinal = arg max (wavPav + wfPf + wtPt)
(3)
The weights wi are constantly changing based on what is
happening in the room.
1) Algorithmic Implementation: Algorithm 1 shows how
we actually coded this logic. The system checks the micro-
phone on every single frame. If the microphone on every single
frame hears speech, all four models get to vote. If it hears
silence, it temporarily turns off the audio and text and then all
the vote goes to the visual models.
Algorithm 1 Dynamic Weighting Fusion Engine
Require: Vt (Video Frames), At (Audio Clip), Tt (Text To-
ken)
Ensure: Efinal (Predicted Emotion)
1: while System is Active do
2:
Pav ←MultiModal Model(At, Vt) // Cross-Attention
Fusion
3:
Pf ←FER Pipeline(Vt) // Static Face
4:
if VAD detects speech in At then
5:
Pt ←DistilRoBERTa(Whisper(At))
6:
wt ←0.4 if max(Pt) > 0.7 else 0.3
7:
wf ←0.3
8:
wav ←1.0 −wt −wf
9:
else
10:
// Silence: Rely on vision
11:
wav ←0.3,
wf ←0.7,
wt ←0.0
12:
end if
13:
Score = (wav × Pav) + (wf × Pf) + (wt × Pt)
14:
Efinal = arg max(Score)
15: end while
2) Asynchronous State Buffering for Temporal Consistency:
A major challenge in Quad-Modal fusion is pipeline design.
While the visual pipelines run at high speed, the audio pipeline
using RoBERTa to read text takes significantly longer. If the
system halted to wait for text analysis, the live video working
would freeze.
To solve this issue, we implement an Asynchronous State
Buffer. The fast video and audio pipelines run on the main
loop, updating the final prediction matrix instantly. Meanwhile,
the NLP pipeline processes data asynchronously in the back-
ground. When the fusion engine asks for the text prediction,
it simply retrieves the last known NLP state from the buffer
rather than waiting for the new one. Because human emotional
states (e.g. happiness, sadness) typically persist for several
seconds, a minor millisecond delay in the textual processing
and update does not affect and break the predictive consistency
of the fusion engine.
D. Graphical User Interface (GUI) and System Deployment
we did not want just a theoretical model, so we built a
Graphic User Interface (GUI). We designed it so that anyone
can use this Emotion Detection system and get a real time
emotional feedback, even if they don’t know anything about
the deep learning concepts.
1) Real-Time Dashboard and Confidence Tracking: The
main part of the GUI is the live dashboard. when the webcam
turns on, you can actually see the weighting algorithm making
decisions about emotion prediction, As shown in the image
below, the dashboard gives a direct readout of the active
pipelines, clearly stating things like ”[Face: 76 frames – Audio:
Silent – Video: Active]”. Being this level of transparency is
super important for domains such as tele-therapy, where the
doctor needs to know why AI thought that the patient was sad.
Fig. 2. The live facial tracking module with privacy-preserving bounding box
overlays.
2) Contextual Recommendations and External Media In-
tegration: We also built a recommendation engine into the
GUI.Instead of just tracking the emotion, it also suggests that
”What To Do” in that particular emotion. as example, if the
system detects we are ”Neutral” then it suggests ” Best time
for deep work....distractions”. It even provides the YouTube
links directly from internet, acting as a mental health assistant
than just a simple predictor.
Fig. 3. The contextual recommendation engine displaying confidence metrics
and curated YouTube media links.
3) Recommendation Engine Logic: The system not only
programmed for just guess emotions, it is programmed to
actively respond on the predicted emotions. Algorithm 2
outlines the specific logic we coded to trigger the external
YouTube therapy recommendation.
E. Dataset and Experimental Setup
To ensure that our AI actually works, we trained it on some
of the most respected datasets. Knowing exactly what data
went into the model is the only way to prove that its not
biased.
1) Cross-Validation and Data Splitting: To ensure strict
subject independence and prevent data leakage, we partitioned
all datasets using a GroupShuffleSplit methodology
with test_size=0.15 and random_state=42. The cor-
pus was split into an 85% training set and a 15% validation
Algorithm 2 Contextual Media Recommendation Engine
Require: Efinal (Current Emotion), Confidence (Percent-
age)
1: History ←Empty Array
2: while Dashboard is Active do
3:
Append Efinal to History
4:
if Efinal is ’Angry’ and Confidence > 90% then
5:
Playlist ←FetchYouTube(’Calming Acoustics’)
6:
Display Playlist on Dashboard
7:
else if Efinal is ’Neutral’ and duration > 5 mins then
8:
Playlist ←FetchYouTube(’Deep Work LoFi’)
9:
Display Playlist on Dashboard
10:
end if
11: end while
set based on actor IDs, guaranteeing that no actor appeared
in both splits. All datasets were unified to a consistent 6-class
label taxonomy (Happy, Sad, Angry, Fear, Neutral, Disgust).
2) The RAVDESS Dataset: Our main dataset was the Ry-
erson Audio-Visual Database of Emotional Speech and song
(RAVDESS). People consider this the gold standard because
it uses the professional actors in perfect studio environment.
As you can see in table 1, the data is balanced across all 6
classes.
TABLE I
RAVDESS DATASET COMPOSITION AND DISTRIBUTION
Emotion Class
Audio Clips
Video Clips
Total Samples
Happy
192
192
384
Sad
192
192
384
Angry
192
192
384
Fear
192
192
384
Disgust
192
192
384
Neutral
96
96
192
Total
1056
1056
2112
3) The SAMM Dataset: RAVDESS is great, but the actors
are faking it. We wanted our system to detect real, spontaneous
micro-expressions. For that, we used the SAMM dataset. They
record people at 200 frames per second while showing them
emotional videos, means every reaction in this dataset is 100%
genuine.
TABLE II
SAMM DATASET DEMOGRAPHICS AND COMPOSITION
Metric
Count / Value
Total Participants
32
Total Spontaneous Micro-Expressions
159
Frame Rate
200 FPS
Resolution
2040 × 1088
Primary Emotion Classes
Happy, Surprise, Anger, Fear, Disgust
4) The CREMA-D Dataset: At last, We finally added the
CREMA-D dataset to make sure our system works on every-
one, not just one specific demographic. CREMA-D includes
91 different actors with a huge variety of ethnicities, ages and
accents. This forces our neural networks to learn universal
emotional signs rather than just memorizing a few specific
faces.
TABLE III
CREMA-D DATASET COMPOSITION
Emotion Class
Audio-Visual Clips
Happy
1,271
Sad
1,271
Angry
1,271
Fear
1,271
Disgust
1,271
Neutral
1,087
Total
7,442
Fig. 4. Examples of the static facial inputs categorized by emotional state.
F. Implementation Details
If someone else wants wants to build this system, they
actually need to know that what setup we had made of the
neural networks.
1) Hardware and Software Constraints: All network train-
ing, hyperparameter tuning, and ablation studies were con-
ducted locally on consumer-grade hardware, specifically an HP
Victus laptop. Due to the lack of CUDA compatible NVIDIA
hardware ( the system features an AMD Radeon GPU), all
deep learning model training and real-time inferences executed
on the CPU. The software stack was built upon a Windows
operating system utilizing python 3.10 (due to limitations of
working of Tensor-Flow framework which only works on
python version of 3.10 or older) and a CPU - optimized
compilation of Tensor-Flow/Keras.
2) Training Strategy: Training was conducted into two
phases. Phase 1 froze the pre-trained audio branch (transferred
from a unimodal) and trained only the video branch and
attention fusion layers for 80 epochs using Adam Optimizer
with a learning rate of 1×10−3 i.e 0.001 and label smoothing
of 0.1. Phase 2 unfroze the entire network and fine-tuned all
160,102 trainable parameters (out of 332,358 total) for 30
epochs 2 × 10−5 i.e. 2e-5(0.00002), with early stopping trig-
gering at epoch 18.. Table IV shows the exact hyperparameter
configuration.
G. Computational Complexity and Hardware Optimization
Because our only option was to run the entire Quad-Modal
on CPU, we had to be very careful about performance. Since
deep learning models are built for GPUs, so running them
sequentially on a CPU create a large problem of bottleneck.
TABLE IV
HYPERPARAMETER CONFIGURATION
Hyperparameter
Configured Value
Optimizer
Adam
Phase 1 Learning Rate
1 × 10−3
Phase 2 Learning Rate
2 × 10−5
LR Scheduler
ReduceLROnPlateau
Label Smoothing
0.1
Dropout Rate
0.35 – 0.50
Loss Function
Categorical Cross-Entropy
Phase 1 Max Epochs
80
Phase 2 Max Epochs
30 (Early Stopped at 18)
1) Time Complexity Analysis: The speed of our system
depends on which pipeline takes the longest to run. If N is
the video pixels, M is the audio data, and T is the text data,
the total time complexity looks like this:
Ofusion = O(N log N) + O(M 2) + O(T 2)
(4)
The O(T 2) part comes from the DistilRoBERTa text model.
Reading text is surprisingly heavy for a CPU, and it sometimes
caused our system to lag behind the webcam feed. We fixed
this by putting the text analysis on its own asynchronous
thread.
TABLE V
SYSTEM HARDWARE AND DEPENDENCY SPECIFICATIONS
Component
Specification / Version
Processor (CPU)
AMD Ryzen / Intel Core i5/i7
Graphics (GPU)
Hardware Acceleration Disabled
RAM Allocation
16 GB DDR4
Deep Learning Framework
TensorFlow / Keras 2.12 (CPU Only)
Audio Processing
Librosa 0.10.0
Computer Vision
OpenCV (cv2) 4.7.0
NLP Backend
Hugging Face Transformers 4.28
2) Data Augmentation and Synthetic Expansion: AI models
are highly reliant for data. If you train them on a small dataset,
they just memorize the faces instead of actually learning how
to read emotions. To prevent this, we artificially expanded our
datasets before we started training.
For the audio model, we injected the fake background noise
(like traffic sounds) into the clips so the AI would learn to
ignore it. We also shifted the pitch up and down to simulate
different types of voices. For the video models, we flipped the
images, darkened them, and tilted them slightly to simulate bad
webcam angles and poor lightning. Class weights were com-
puted using compute_class_weight(’balanced’) to
handle the imbalanced classes.
H. Ethical Considerations, Privacy, and Algorithmic Bias
Giving the computer the ability to read people’s mind can be
ethically dangerous. Before putting a system like this in the
real world, we have to establish some strict rules regarding
bias and privacy.
1) Algorithmic Bias and Demographic Representation:
Older facial recognition systems were notoriously bad at
reading the faces of minorities. They were mostly trained on
white actors with perfect studio environment. Because of this,
they would constantly misread darker skin tones, frequently
flagging neutral expressions as ’Angry’ just because they
didn’t know how to process the shadows.
To fix this, we used highly diversed CREMA-D dataset. We
also rely heavily on audio and text (which aren’t affected by
skin color at all). Our weighting algorithm acts as an equalizer,
ensuring the system doesn’t make biased assumptions based
purely on pixels.
2) Biometric Privacy and GDPR Compliance: Your emo-
tional state is highly sensitive data. Most AI systems today
send your webcam footage up to a cloud server to process it.
That is a massive privacy risk. We designed our Quad-Modal
architecture specifically to run entirely on a local CPU. Be-
cause everything happens directly on your computer’s RAM,
your webcam footage never touches the internet, ensuring total
privacy.
3) The Danger of Weaponized Emotion AI: Beyond bias
and privacy, we have to regulate how this AI is used. If
corporations use this to monitor if their employees are ’happy’
while working, it creates a dystopian nightmare. Because of
this we strongly believe our Quad-modal system should only
be used in consensual, medical environments like therapy or
automotive safety, where the user actually benefits from the
AI.
I. Real-World Application Domains
Because our system runs locally on basic hardware, it can
be safely used in a different types of commercial and medical
environments.
1) Healthcare and Tele-Therapy: Therapists rely on body
language to figure out how a patient is doing. But in now
modern times, everyone doing now Zoom therapy, reading
those tiny micro-expressions through a compressed webcam
feed is tough. If therapists use our system, they can get a live
readout of patient’s emotional condition on the side of their
screen, helping them provide better care remotely.
2) Education and E-Learning: It is really hard for teacher
to ”read the kids” when they are teaching 30 kids over a video
call or in Zoom meeting. our system can run in the background
of an educational app and aggregate the class’s mood. If
the system detects that 80% of the class feels ”Disgust” or
”Angry”(Frustrated), then it helps the teacher to observe that
to slow down and explain the concept again.
3) Automotive Safety and Driver Monitoring: Driver fa-
tigue and road rage cause a massive amount of accidents.
Car companies are already putting cameras inside cars. If our
system is installed in a dashboard, it can keep eye on driver,
and with the help of alert alarm if installed in car, it can
alerts the driver to not sleeping by detecting ”Disgust” emotion
state. Another condition can occurs, if it detects screaming
and anger, it can automatically boost car’s collision- avoidance
sensors(if integrated with them.
4) Customer Service and Call Centers: Customer service
reps deal with incredibly stressed people all day. If our system
run in the background of a video call center, it can track
the customer’s mood. If it sees the customer getting rapidly
”Angry”, it can automatically flag the call so manager can step
in and de-escalate the situation.
III. RESULTS
A. Real-World Operational Case Studies
To show why our weighting algorithm is better than older
models, let’s look at three quick real-world scenarios.
1) Scenario 1: High Background Noise (The Coffee Shop):
If you use this in a noisy coffee shop, a normal audio AI will
freak out. But our system’s Voice Activity Detector will realize
the background is too messy. It will automatically drop the
audio trust weights to zero and shift all its focus to the visual
models, easily reading your mood even in the loud room.
2) Scenario 2: Visual Occlusion (The Medical Mask): If
you are wearing a mask, a vision-only AI is completely blind
it can’t see your mouth (which it needs to spot a smile). Our
system will realize the face tracking is failing, it drops the
visual weights to zero and lean entirely on the microphone,
figuring out your mood just by listening to the tone of your
voice.
3) Scenario 3: Contradictory Inputs (Sarcasm): Sarcasm
breaks almost every AI. If you roll your eyes and say ” I am
so happy” in a flat voice, a text-only AI will think you are
actually happy. Our system catches the lie. By fusing the flat
audio with the negative eye roll, it overrides the spoken words
and correctly tags the emotion as ”Angry”.
a) Exhaustive Results and Analytics: Even while re-
stricted entirely to CPU processing, our model hit a solid
validation accuracy of 61.21% with a mean AUC of 0.90 when
tested against chaotic real-world data spanning three datasets
and six emotion classes.
4) Confusion Matrix and Class Distribution: As Figure
5 shows, the system successfully mapped 1526 validation
samples across 6 classes. The diagonal values sum to 934
correct, yielding an exact accuracy of 934/1526 = 61.21%.
The system is highly accurate at spotting ”Angry” (185/273)
and ”Happy” (169/261), but got slightly confused between
”Fear” and ”Sad”, mostly because people’s voices sound very
similar when expressing those two emotions.
5) Convergence Analytics: We watched the training curves
closely to make sure the AI wasn’t just memorizing the
answers(overfitting). As shown in Figure 6, the phase 2
fine-tuning curves exhibit natural stochastic variance: training
accuracy oscillates between 61.5% and 63.9% while validation
stabilizes in a narrow band around 61.5%-62.1%. The persis-
tent gap between two curves confirms genuine generalization
without artificial convergence.
6) Multi-Class ROC Analysis: To evaluate discriminatory
power beyond raw accuracy, we computed per class ROC
curves. As shown in Figure 7, the system achieved exception-
ally strong AUC scores: Neutral(0.96), Angry (0.93), Happy
(0.88), Disgust and Sad (0.87 each), and Fear (0.86). A mean
Fig. 5. Confusion Matrix: 1526 validation samples across 6 emotion classes.
Diagonal sum = 934, giving 934/1526 = 61.21% accuracy.
AUC of 0.90 demonstrates that the model maintains strong
class separability even for commonly confused emotion pairs.
7) Per-Class Precision, Recall, and F1-Score: Figure 8
breaks down the model’s performance for each individual
emotion. Angry (F1=0.70) and Neutral (F1=0.73) were the
easiest to detect, while Fear (F1=0.55) and Sad (F1=0.54) were
the most challenging due to overlapping acoustic features.
8) t-SNE Embedding Visualization: To visually confirm
that the Cross-Modal Attention layer was learning meaning-
ful fusion representations, we extracted the 64-dimensional
embeddings from the penultimate fully connected layer and
projected them into 2D space using t-SNE. As shown in Figure
9, Neutral (blue) and Angry (red) from clearly separated
clusters, while Fear and Disgust show more overlap, consistent
with the confusion matrix findings.
9) Modality Contribution: Figure 10 visualizes the mea-
sured Quad-Modal weight distribution. The internal Audio-
Video split (20.8% vs 19.2%) was extracted from the Multi-
Head Attention layer’s learned weights, while the static FER
(30.0%) and Text NLP (30.0%) contributions reflect the mean
adaptive weights from the inference engine over the validation
set.
10) Latency Under CPU-Bound Load: Because we were
running this strictly on a CPU on HP Victus laptop without
CUDA acceleration, we had to heavily monitor exactly how
many milliseconds each model was taking.
TABLE VI
AVERAGE INFERENCE LATENCY PER COMPONENT (CPU ONLY)
Pipeline Component
Latency (ms)
Status
Video Preprocessing (OpenCV)
12
Real-Time
Audio STFT (Librosa)
28
Real-Time
Audio-Video Model
45
Acceptable
Static FER (HuggingFace)
55
Acceptable
DistilRoBERTa (NLP)
210
Async Thread
Fig. 6.
Combined Training and Validation Accuracy (left) and Loss (right) over fine-tuned epochs. the curves represent natural stochastic variance and a
healthy, persistent generalization gap, proving the model is not overfitting to the training set.
Fig. 7. Multi-Class ROC Curves with per-class AUC scores, demonstrating
a mean AUC of 0.90 across all six emotion categories.
Fig. 8. Per-class Precision, Recall, and F1-Score metrics for all six emotion
categories.
Fig. 9. t-SNE projection of the 64-dimensional cross-modal attention embed-
dings, showing emotion-specific clustering.
Fig. 10. Measured Quad-Modal attention weight distribution across the four
pipelines during active validation.
As shown in Table VI, the OpenCV and Librosa pre-
processing steps were incredibly fast. The only major bot-
tleneck was the DistilRoBERTa NLP model at 210ms. By
employing the asynchronous state buffer described in Section
VI, we prevented this 210ms lag from stalling the UI. Because
human emotional expressions typically last between 0.5 to
4.0 seconds, fusing a slightly delayed (210ms) text result
with a real-time video frame maintains flawless prediction
consistency without destroying frame rates.
IV. DISCUSSION
A. Failure Analysis and Limitations
While hitting 61.21% accuracy on a CPU is a solid result,
the system isn’t perfect. Looking at the confusion matrix
(Figure 5), the AI sometimes mixes up ”Fear” and ”Sad”.
This happens because people’s voice naturally get higher and
faster during both of those emotions. If the person’s face is
covered while they are yelling, the audio model gets confused
and guesses the wrong emotion. Furthermore, static vision
models suffer from ’neutral face misclassification’, where
resting facial geometry is confused with negative emotions like
Disgust or Anger [16]. Our architecture solves this inherent
static bias by requiring high optical flow to validate negative
micro-expressions, preventing false positives on resting faces.
B. Ablation Studies and Baseline Comparison
To mathematically prove that we actually needed all four
models, we ran an ablation study. We basically turned off
different cameras and microphones to see how badly the
system would crash.
1) Why Quad-Modal if Unimodal Audio Scores Higher?:
A natural question arises: if our own unimodal Audio CNN
already achieved 73% accuracy on the CREMA-D dataset,
and highly-tuned unimodal evaluated in strictly controlled
environments often report accuracies exceeding 90%, then why
we need the Quad-modal system with slightly less accuracy
then unimodal.
So, for this the answer lies in three critical blind spots that
no audio-only system can overcome:
(1) The Studio Recording Illusion. Datasets like CREMA-
D and RAVDESS are recorded in professional soundproof
studio with high-end condenser microphones positioned cen-
timeters from the speaker’s mouth. These pristine conditions
produce unnaturally clean audio that a neural network can
easily classify. However, in real-world deployment, the user
is sitting in a noisy room with a normal laptop microphone.
Background noise (traffic, air conditioning, keyboard clicks)
masks the subtle pitch and rhythm cues that the depends
on. Research consistently shows that audio-only SER models
suffer from catastrophic domain shift in noisy environments,
with accuracy suffering degradation compared to clean studio
environments [9].
(2) Silence Equals System Failure. Audio-only models
produce zero output when the user stops talking. If a person
is sitting quietly while feeling deeply sad, the microphone
captures nothing but ambient noise. The model either crashes
or randomly guesses. Our Quad-Modal system automatically
detects this silence via the Voice Activity Detector and seam-
lessly shifts all trust to the visual pipelines, maintaining
continuous coverage.
(3) Audio Cannot Resolve Contradictory Signals. When
someone sarcastically says ” I am so happy right now” in a
flat, monotone voice, an audio-only model detects flat tone
and classifies it as Neutral. But their facial expression (eye
rolling, frowning) clearly signals Anger. Without visual and
textual cross-referencing, the audio model is fundamentally
incapable of detecting sarcasm, deception, or mixed emotions.
Our system catches these contradictions by fusing all four
modalities through cross-modal attention.
In summary, high audio-only accuracy on studio datasets is
an artifact of controlled recording conditions, not a reflection
of real-world robustness. Our Quad-Modal architecture delib-
erately trades peak studio accuracy for the ability to survive
noise, silence and contradictory inputs, which is the only
metric that matters in deployment.
2) Visual Deprivation (Audio-Text Only): When we turned
the cameras off (simulating a pitch-black room), the system
just listened to the audio. It still held a decent 58.12% accuracy
as long as the user kept talking. But the moment the room went
quiet, the system completely failed, proving exactly why we
needed the visual models as a backup.
3) Acoustic Deprivation (Vision Only): When we muted
the microphones, the video models had to do all the work. It
could easily spot obvious smiles(”Happy”), but it had a really
hard time telling the difference between subtle sadness and
fear, causing the accuracy to drop to 51.44%. This proves that
you simply cannot built a reliable emotion detector using only
cameras.
TABLE VII
ABLATION STUDY: IMPACT OF MODALITY ISOLATION ON ACCURACY
Active Modalities
Disabled Modalities
Accuracy
All (Quad-Modal)
None (Baseline)
61.21%
Audio + Text + Static
Video CNN
58.10%
Video + Static + Text
Audio CNN
54.75%
Audio + Text Only
Both Vision
58.12%
Video + Static Only
Audio + NLP
51.44%
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we built a Quad-Modal Emotion Detection
System to fix the annoying bugs found in older, single-input AI
models. By running video, audio, text, and static image analy-
sis all the same time using Cross-Modal multi-Head Attention,
we gave the computer a much deeper understanding of human
behavior. Our custom Weighting Algorithm proved that if one
sensor fails, the AI can instantly pivot and rely on the other
sensors to keep working. The system achieved a validation
accuracy of 61.21% with a mean AUC of 0.90 across six
emotion classes, demonstrating strong discriminatory power
even under CPU-only constraints.
TABLE VIII
SUMMARY OF KEY PROJECT ACHIEVEMENTS
Metric
Achievement
Architecture
Quad-Modal (AV Attention + FER + NLP)
Fusion Strategy
Cross-Modal Multi-Head Attention + Adap-
tive Weights
Hardware
100% Local CPU Processing
Accuracy / AUC
61.21% / 0.90 mean AUC
Target Audience
Tele-therapy, Education, Automotive
A. Future Work and Development Roadmap
Moving forward, we have planned a three-phase Roadmap
to upgrade this system from a local prototype to a fully
upgraded and deployable application, without losing our focus
on user privacy.
1) Phase 1: Hardware Acceleration. Right now, the sys-
tem is bottlenecked by the HP Victus CPU. our first
goal is to rewrite the inference engine to support CUDA.
By offloading the CNN and RoBERTa models to an
NVIDIA GPU, we expect to hit a flawless 60 FPS real-
time processing speed.
2) Phase 2: Penta-Modal Integration. Visual and audio
cues can sometimes be faked by the user. To prevent
this, we plan to integrate smart watch APIs to pull
in the live Hear-Rate variability (HRV) and Galvanic
Skin Response (GSR). Adding this fifth modality (Penta-
Modal) will make the system nearly foolproof.
3) phase 3: Real Time Learning. Sometimes Inference
mode of the system gives emotion prediction based on
learned and trained features and test cases. So, our goal
is to make it a real time learner, that makes it to learn
from new and different types of real-world scenarios.
4) Phase 4: Mobile Edge Deployment. Finally, we need
to drastically shrink the deep learning models using
technique called ”Quantization”. By making the model
smaller, we can deploy the entire Quad-Modal system
directly onto Android or iOS smartphone, allowing users
to have a private mental health companion in their
pocket.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We want to say a massive thank you to our project guide
for their invaluable mentorship, technical guidance, and con-
tinuous support throughout this research. I also extend my
deepest appreciation to the Department of Computer Science
and Engineering at Harcourt Buttler Technical University. The
facilities, resources and academic environment provided by
University were instrumental in the successful development
and implementation of this project.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Ekman and W. V. Friesen, ”Constants across cultures in the face and
emotion,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, vol. 17, no. 2,
pp. 124–129, 1971.
[2] S. R. Livingstone and F. A. Russo, ”The Ryerson Audio-Visual Database
of Emotional Speech and Song (RAVDESS),” PLOS ONE, vol. 13, no.
5, 2018.
[3] A. K. Davison et al., ”SAMM: A Spontaneous Micro-Facial Movement
Dataset,” IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, vol. 9, no. 1, pp.
116–129, 2018.
[4] H. Cao et al., ”CREMA-D: Crowd-sourced Emotional Multimodal
Actors Dataset,” IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, vol. 5, no.
4, pp. 377-390, 2014.
[5] A. Radford et al., ”Robust Speech Recognition via Large-Scale Weak
Supervision (Whisper),” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.04356, 2022.
[6] Y. Liu et al., ”RoBERTa: A Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining
Approach,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
[7] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, ”Deep Residual Learning for
Image Recognition,” Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), pp. 770–778, 2016.
[8] D. Tran, L. Bourdev, R. Fergus, L. Torresani, and M. Paluri, ”Learning
Spatiotemporal Features with 3D Convolutional Networks,” Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), pp. 4489–4497, 2015.
[9] S. Poria, E. Cambria, R. Bajpai, and A. Hussain, ”A review of affective
computing: From unimodal analysis to multimodal fusion,” Information
Fusion, vol. 37, pp. 98–125, 2017.
[10] T. Baltruˇsaitis, C. Ahuja, and L. Morency, ”Multimodal Machine Learn-
ing: A Survey and Taxonomy,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 423–443, 2019.
[11] M. S. Hossain and G. Muhammad, ”Emotion recognition using deep
learning approach from audio-visual emotional big data,” Information
Fusion, vol. 49, pp. 69–78, 2019.
[12] P. Viola and M. Jones, ”Robust real-time face detection,” Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), vol. 2, pp. 747–754, 2001.
[13] G. Bradski, ”The OpenCV Library,” Dr. Dobb’s Journal of Software
Tools, vol. 25, pp. 120–123, 2000.
[14] C. G. Busso et al., ”IEMOCAP: Interactive emotional dyadic motion
capture database,” Language resources and evaluation, vol. 42, no. 4,
pp. 335–359, 2008.
[15] B. Schuller, S. Steidl, and A. Batliner, ”The INTERSPEECH 2009 emo-
tion challenge,” Tenth Annual Conference of the International Speech
Communication Association, 2009.
[16] J. Macbeth and C. Rogers, ”Throwing shade: The science of resting
bitch face,” Noldus Information Technology, 2015.
[17] A. Mollahosseini, B. Hasani, and M. H. Mahoor, ”AffectNet: A database
for facial expression, valence, and arousal computing in the wild,” IEEE
Transactions on Affective Computing, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 18-31, 2017.
